MODULE - 2
About Economy
Economy – Its Meaning and Types
ECONOMICS
Notes
 25
4
ECONOMY – ITS MEANING
AND TYPES
The purpose of every economy is to satisfy human wants by using limited or scarce
resources available and known to a society. These wants can be satisfied by production
and consumption of goods and services. For production, the factors of production are
engaged in some economic activities. These economic activities bring income to the
economic agents that can either be consumed or saved and invested. On account of
these gainful economic activities and accumulated earnings, some countries grow fast
while others cannot attain such high growth rate. As a result some economies attain the
status of developed economies while others remain underdeveloped or developing
economies. They are also known as rich and poor economies. We can look at
economies on the basis of ownership of resources. The resources available may be in
private ownership or the collective ownership. Thus there are different ways to look at
the economy and its level of development. In this lesson we will explain all these terms
in simple way so that you may understand and differentiate the meaning and nature of
an economy and understand its various types.
OBJECTIVES
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
 explain the meaning of an economy;
 differentiate between various types of economic organizations on the basis of
ownership and control of resources as well as on the basis of level of
development;
 understand the meaning of economic development and economic growth;
 distinguish between economic development and economic growth;
 understand the important determinants of economic development.
ECONOMICS
MODULE - 2 Economy – Its Meaning and Types
About Economy
 26
Notes
4.1 MEANING OF AN ECONOMY
An economy is a man-made organization for the satisfaction of human wants. According
to A.J. Brown, “An economy is a system by which people get living”. The way man
attempts to get a living differs in major respects from time to time and from place to place.
In primitive times ‘get a living’ was simple but with growth of civilization it has become
much more complex. Here it is important to note that the way person earns his/her living
must be legal and fair. Unfair and illegal means such as robbery, smuggling may earn
income for oneself but should not be taken into consideration as gainful economic
activity or a system of ‘get a living’. It will therefore be appropriate to call that
economy is a framework where all economic activities are carried out.
Some of the salient features of an economy are as follows:
1. Economic institutions are man made. Thus an economy is what we make it.
2. Economic institutions can be created, destroyed, replaced or changed. For
example the capitalism was replaced by communism in 1917 in USSR and the
communism was destroyed in 1989 through a series of economic reforms by former
USSR. In India after independence in 1947 through economic and social reforms
we abolished Zamindari system and introduced many land reform.
3. Levels of economic activities keep on changing.
4. Producers and consumers are the same persons. Thus they have a dual role. As
producers they work and produce certain goods and services and consume the
same as consumers.
5. Production, consumption and investment are the vital processes of an economy.
6. In modern complex economies we use money as a medium, of exchange.
7. Now-a-days the government intervention in the economy is considered undesirable
and the preference for free functioning of prices and market forces is increasing in
all types of economic system.
4.2 TYPES OF ECONOMIES
As you know that economy is a man-made organization, which is created, destroyed
or changed as per the requirement of the society. We can differentiate in various types
of economic systems on the basis of following criteria.
4.2.1 On the Basis of Ownership and Control over Means of
Production or Resources
Resources or means of production remain either in private ownership with full individual
freedom to use them for the profit motive or they can be in collective ownership
MODULE - 2
About Economy
Economy – Its Meaning and Types
ECONOMICS
Notes
 27
(government control) and can be used for the collective welfare of the society as a
whole. Based on the criterion of degree of individual freedom and profit motive,
economies are labelled as:
(A) Capitalist or free enterprise economy
(B) Socialist or centrally planned economy
(C) Mixed economy
Now we shall discuss about the main characteristics of these economics in brief.
(A) Capitalist Economy
The capitalist or free enterprise economy is the oldest form of economy. Earlier
economists supported the policy of ‘laissez fair’ meaning leave free. They advocated
minimum government  intervention in the economic activities. The following are the main
features of a capitalist economy;
(i) Private property
In a capitalism system all the individuals have the right to own property. An individual
can acquire property and use it for the benefit of his own family. There is no restriction
on the ownership of land, machines, mines, factories and to earn profit and accumulate
wealth. After the death of a person the property or wealth is transferred to the legal heirs.
Thus the institution of private property is sustained over time by the right of inheritance.
(ii) Freedom of enterprise
In a capitalist economy the government does not coordinate production decisions of the
citizens. Individuals are free to choose any occupation. Freedom of enterprise implies
that business firms are free to acquire resources and use them in the production of any
good or service. The firms are also free to sell their product in the markets of their choice.
A worker is free to choose his/her employer. In small business units owner himself takes
the risk of production and earns profit or loss for himself. But in modern corporations
the shareholders take risks whereas paid directors manage business. Thus the individual
supervision of one’s own capital is now no longer required to earn profit. Government
or any other agency does not impose restrictions/obstacles in the way of workers to
enter or leave a particular industry. A worker chooses that occupation where his income
is maximum.
(iii) Consumer’s Sovereignty
In a capitalist economy consumers are like a king. They have the full freedom to spend
their income on goods and services that give them maximum satisfaction. In capitalist
system production is guided by consumer’s choices. This freedom of consumers is
called consumer’s sovereignty.
ECONOMICS
MODULE - 2 Economy – Its Meaning and Types
About Economy
 28
Notes
(iv) Profit Motive
Self-interest is the guiding principle in capitalism. Entrepreneurs know that they will own
the profit or loss after the payment to all other factors of production. Therefore they are
always motivated to maximize their residual profit by minimizing cost and maximizing
revenue. This makes the capitalist economy an efficient and self-regulated economy.
(v) Competition
There are no restrictions on the entry and exit of firms in a capitalism system. The large
number of producers are available to supply a particular good or service and therefore
no firm can earn more than normal profit. Competition is the fundamental feature of
capitalist economy and essential to safeguard against consumer’s exploitation. Although
due to large-size and product distinction monopolistic tendencies have grown these
days still the competition can be seen among a large number of firms.
(vi) Importance of markets and prices
The important features of capitalism like private property, freedom of choice, profit
motive and competition make a room for free and efficient functioning of price
mechanism. Capitalism is essentially a market economy where every commodity has a
price. The forces of demand and supply in an industry determine this price. Firms which
are able to adjust at a given price earn normal profit and those who fail to do so often
quit the industry. A producer will produce those goods, which give him more profit.
(vii) Absence of government interference
In a free enterprise or capitalist economy the price system plays an important role of
coordinating agent. Government intervention and support is not required. The role of
government is to help in free and efficient functioning of the markets.
Capitalism in today’s world
Pure capitalism is not seen in the world now-a-days. The economies of USA, UK,
France, Netherland, Spain, Portugal, Australia ect. are known as capitalistic countries
with active role of their respective government in economic development.
(B) Socialist Economy
In the socialist or centrally planned economies all the productive resources are owned
and controlled by the government in the overall interest of the society. A central planning
authority takes the decisions. The socialist economy has the following main features.
(i) Collective Ownership of means of Production
In a Socialist economy means of production are owned by the government on behalf
of the people. The institution of private property is abolished and no individual is allowed
to own any production unit and accumulate wealth and transfer it to their heirs. However,
people may own some durable consumer goods for their personal use.
MODULE - 2
About Economy
Economy – Its Meaning and Types
ECONOMICS
Notes
 29
(ii) Social Welfare Objective
The decisions are taken by the government at macro level with the objective of
maximization of social welfare in mind rather than maximization of individual profit. The
forces of demand and  supply do not play any important role. Careful decisions are taken
with the welfare objectives in mind.
(iii) Central Planning
Economic planning is an essential feature of a socialist economy. The Central Planning
Authority keeping the national priorities and availability of resources in mind allocates
resources. Government takes all economic decisions regarding production, consumption
and investment keeping in mind the present and future needs. The planning authorities
fix targets for various sectors and ensure efficient utilization of resources.
(iv) Reduction in Inequalities
The  institutions of private property and inheritance are at the root of inequalities of
income and wealth in a capitalist economy. By abolishing these twin institutions a
socialist economic system is able to reduce the inequalities of incomes. It is important
to note that perfect equality in income and wealth is neither desirable nor practicable.
(v) No class conflict
In capitalist economy the interests of the workers and management are different. Both
of them want to maximize their own individual profit or earnings. This results in class
conflict in capitalist economy. In socialism there is no competition among classes. Every
person is a worker so there is no class conflict. All are co-workers.
Socialism in today’s world
Countries such as Russia, China and many eastern European countries are said to be
socialist countries. But they are changing now and encouraging liberalisation in their
countries for their economic development.
(C) Mixed Economy
A mixed economy combines the best features of capitalism and socialism. Thus mixed
economy has some elements of both free enterprise or capitalist economy as well as a
government controlled socialist economy. The public and private sectors co-exist in
mixed economies. The main characteristics of a mixed economy are as follows:
(i) Co-existence of public and private sectors.
The private sector consists of production units that are owned privately and work on
the basis of profit motive. The public sector consists of production units owned by the
government and works on the basis of social welfare. The areas of economic activities
of each sector are generally demarcated. Government uses its various policies e.g.
licensing policy, taxation policy, price policy, monetary policy and fiscal policy to control
and regulate the private sector.
ECONOMICS
MODULE - 2 Economy – Its Meaning and Types
About Economy
 30
Notes
(ii) Individual Freedom
Individuals take up economic activities to maximize their personal income. They are free
to choose any occupation and consume as per their choice. But producers are not given
the freedom to exploit consumers and labourers. Government puts some restrictions
keeping in mind the welfare of the people. For instance, government may put restrictions
on the production and consumption of harmful goods. But within rules, regulations and
restrictions imposed by the government, for the welfare of the society the private sector
enjoys complete freedom.
(iii)   Economic Planning
The government  prepares long-term plans and decides the roles to be played by the
private and public sectors in the development of the economy. The public sector is under
direct control of the government as such production targets and plans are formulated
for them directly. The private sector is provided encouragement, incentives, support and
subsidies to work as per national priorities.
(iv) Price Mechanism
Prices play a significant role in the allocation of resources. For some sectors the policy
of administered prices is adopted. Government also provides price subsidies to help the
target group. The aim of the government is to maximize the welfare of the masses. For
those who can not afford to purchase the goods at market prices, government makes
the goods available either free of cost or at below market (subsidized) prices.
Thus in a mixed economy people at large enjoy individual freedom and government
support to protect the interests of weaker sections of the society.
Indian economy is considered a mixed economy as it has well defined areas for
functioning of public and private sectors and economic planning. Even countries such
as USA, UK, etc. which were known as capitalistic countries are also called mixed
economies now because of  active role of their government in economic development.
INTEXT QUESTIONS 4.1
1. Which of the following statements are True or False?
(i) On the basis of ownership of resources we can classify an economy as Rich
economy and Poor economy.
(ii) Socialist economy aims at maximization of social welfare.
(iii) Freedom of choice, profit maximization and private property are the
characteristics of a Socialist economy.
(iv) In a mixed economy public and private sectors co exist.
2. Fill in the blanks with appropriate words given in the bracket.
(i) Price mechanism plays …………………. role in capitalist or free market
economy (the most important/a very limited)
MODULE - 2
About Economy
Economy – Its Meaning and Types
ECONOMICS
Notes
 31
(ii) The freedom of choice is called …………………. in capitalist economy
(consumers sovereignty/consumer surplus)
(iii) The socialist economies are …………………. economies. (centrally planned
decentralized)
(iv) People can accumulate wealth and transfer it to their legal heirs in
…………………. economy. (capitalist/socialist)
(v) Public sector and private sector …………………. in a mixed economy
(co-exist/does not exist)
3. Classify the following characteristics of different types of economies and put them
in appropriate boxes.
Profit motive, central planning, consumer sovereignty, public and private sector,
laws of inheritance, social welfare, government regulations, subsidy, competition,
price mechanism, inequalities, no class conflict, economic planning and limited
freedom of choice.
Capitalist Socialist Mixed
Economy Economy Economy
4.2.2 Types of Economics on the Basis of Level of Development
On the basis of level of development economies can be classified in two categories:
(i) Developed economy
(ii) Developing economy
The countries are labeled developed or rich and developing or poor on the basis of real
national and per capita income and standard of living of its population. Developed
countries have higher national and per-capita income, high rate of capital formation i.e.
high savings and investment. They have highly educated human resources, better civic
facilities, health and sanitation facilities, low birth rate, low death rate, low infant
mortality, developed industrial and social infrastructures and a strong financial and
capital market. In short, developed countries have high standard of living.
Developing countries are low on the ladder of development. They are sometimes also
called underdeveloped, backward or poor countries. But economists prefer to call them
developing countries because it gives a sense of dynamism. The national and per capita
income is low in these countries. They have backward agricultural and industrial sectors
with low savings, investment and capital formation. Although these countries have
export earnings but generally they export primary agicultural products. In short, they
have low standard of living and poor health and sanitation, high infant mortality, high birth
ECONOMICS
MODULE - 2 Economy – Its Meaning and Types
About Economy
 32
Notes
and death rates and poor infrastructure. Thus economic development depends on many
factors and has different meanings. Although you have already read, it will be useful to
discuss again the meaning of economic development, its determinants and the difference
between the terms economic development and economic growth in the context of
present lesson.
4.3 MEANING OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Economic growth, as distinguished from economic development, is a sustained increase
in national income. Taking the differences in population into consideration, it is reflected
in the growth of per-capita income (i.e. national income + total population).
Although there may be year-to-year fluctuations or short-term variations in the growth
of national income, there has to be a continuous growth in national income in the long-
run for it to qualify as economic growth.
Economic development, on the other hand, includes not only economic growth but also
various other economic changes that improve the quality of life or standard of living of
people in a country. If with economic growth, a country experiences various economic
changes such as reduction in poverty and unemployment, reduction in income and
wealth inequality, increase in literacy rate, improvement in health and hygiene, decrease
in population growth, improvement in environmental standards etc, that improve the
quality of life then that is economic development. Such economic changes that are
conducive  to improvements in standards of living of people are necessary for economic
development. Otherwise, peoples standard of living may not improve in-spite of
economic growth. It may happen that with economic growth, the rich get richer while
the poor get poorer if the fruits of growth are snatched by the richer sections of the
society. Clearly, economic development is a much broader concept than economic
growth. It not only includes economic growth but also various other economic changes
that bring about improvement in the standard of living of people or quality of life.
4.4 DETERMINANTS OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The process of economic development is influenced by a number of economic as well
as non-economic factors.
The important economic factors are as follows:
(i) Natural Resources: The availability of natural resources facilitate and accelerate
economic growth and economic development. It is believed that quality and
quantity of natural resources affect the rate of growth.
(ii) Human Resources: Another important determinant of economic development is
the quantity and quality of human resources or the population. Other things being
MODULE - 2
About Economy
Economy – Its Meaning and Types
ECONOMICS
Notes
 33
equal, educated and technically qualified manpower helps in achieving higher
growth rate. On the other hand illiterate and unskilled population retards economic
growth.
(iii) Capital Formation: Stock of capital goods is crucial for rapid economic growth.
For increasing the stock of capital, rate of savings must be high. The savings must
be invested. Given the rate of savings and investment the rate of growth will depend
upon capital output ratio. If the domestic savings are not sufficient government can
seek external assistance to increase capital formation and growth rate in developing
countries.
(iv) Technology: Technology can play an important role in the economic development.
Technological progress depends upon continuous research and development.
Through technological progress a nation may overcome other constraints such as
scarcity of natural resources and low productivity. Developed economies invest
in its human capital.
Besides these economic factors many other non-economic factors such as (i) caste
system, (ii)  family type, (iii) racial factors, and (iv) government policies also affect the
rate of growth and economic development. It is very difficult to measure economic
development and to give one index of economic development. The most commonly
used index of economic development i.e. increase in per capita income suffers from a
serious drawback. This index does not take into account the consumption of natural
resources and environmental degradation such as the smoke from the industries or the
pollution caused by various industrial waste and by-products in the air and water
resources. The cutting of forest and selling of timber will earn income and will be
considered an economic activity and the income added in the national income statistics
but the harm caused by deforestation will not be shown as a negative entry in the national
accounts statistics. The economist therefore are seriously working on preparation of
some new index that may account for these environment costs to the society and can
be used as a welfare index of the society.
4.5 DISTINCTION BETWEEN ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Economic growth is a short-term measure and generally refers to year to year rise in
national and per capita income in real terms. But the income index doen not take into
account  the distributional aspects of national income. Another important thing is that
income approach does not take into account the unproductive and dysfunction growth
and productive and socially useful growth. Economic development on the other hand
is a long term measure over a long period. The economic development refers to overall
rise in standard of  living and a better quality of life. Besides income index some non-
income indices are also taken into account. These are high life expectancy at birth, low
ECONOMICS
MODULE - 2 Economy – Its Meaning and Types
About Economy
 34
Notes
infant mortality and high rate of literacy. An improvement in these non-income indices
imply that the quality of life has also improved. Some important institutions like
UNESCO and ILO include the basic needs approach such as availability of food,
clothing and shelter, availability of drinking water, sanitation and public transport
facilities good health and education as an index of economic development. The
objective of development, therefore, is meeting the needs of the vast masses of
population. The United Nations Development Programmes emphasizes on Human
Development Index (HDI) that is based on per capita income, educational attainment
and life expectancy. Thus it is a composite index of economic and social indicators. The
economic development, therefore, is a much wider term to capture over all improvement
in the quality of life of people.
INTEXT QUESTIONS 4.2
Answer the following questions.
1. What are the two categories of economy on the basis of level of development?
2. Give simple meaning of economic development.
3. Give economic factors of determinants of development.
4. What are the non-economic factors affecting development?
5. What is the serious drawback in income approach to development?
6. Distinguish between economic growth and economic development.
7. How is capital formation important for economic growth?
WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
 In this lesson we have learnt the meaning of an economy. It is a system of socially
and legally acceptable ways by which people get a living. An economy is also looked
at as a system of cooperation for the satisfaction of human wants.
 In a modern complex economy, the cooperation exists in the form ‘you do this for
me and I will do that for you is not enough’. The cooperation can be seen across
national boundaries. Thus economy can be seen as a system of mutual cooperation
and exchanges.
 Economy can be classified into the following three categories on the basis of
ownership and control over means of production.
MODULE - 2
About Economy
Economy – Its Meaning and Types
ECONOMICS
Notes
 35
(i) Capitalist Economy
(ii) Socialist Economy
(iii) Mixed Economy
 Economy can be classified into the following two categories on the basis of level of
development:
(i) Developed Economy
(ii) Developing Economy
 Capitalist Economy gives much importance to individual freedom and compretition.
Consumers behave like a king and play a significant role in the allocation of
resources through price system, profit motive and markets.
 Socialist Economy gives too much importance to collective ownership, society’s
welfare and economic planning. The inequalities are reduced and class conflict is
avoided.
 Mixed economy gives importance to the merits of both the systems. Here public and
private sectors coexist. Public sector works on the basis of socialist economy
whereas the private sector works on the basis of capitalist economy.
 Developed rich countries have higher per capita income and better standard of living
and quality of life.
 Underdeveloped or poor countries on the other hand have low income, savings and
investment and therefore they have poor standard of living.
 The process of economic development is determined by number of economic and
non-economic factors.
 There is a difference between development and economic growth. Generally
economic growth refers to short-run improvements in a few selected sectors and
variables. The economic development on the other hand refers to long run increase
in national and per capita income along with many other non-economy factors that
improve overall quality of life.
TERMINAL EXERCISE
1. What is meant by an economy? Give the major characteristics of a capitalist
economy.
2. “Economy is a system of mutual cooperation and exchanges. “Discuss.
ECONOMICS
MODULE - 2 Economy – Its Meaning and Types
About Economy
 36
Notes
3. Explain the types of economy on the basis of ownership and control over means of
production.
4. Distinguishes between economic development and economic growth.
5. What are the main determinants of economic development?
ANSWERS TO INTEXT QUESTIONS
Intext Questions 4.1
1. (i) False (ii) True (iii) False (iv) True
2. (i) the most important (ii) Consumer’s sovereignty (iii) centrally planned
(iv) Capitalist (v) Co-exist
3. Classify the following characteristics
Capitalist Economy Socialist Economy Mixed Economy
Profit motive Central Planning Public and Private Sector
Consumer Sovereignty Social welfare Government Regulations
Law of inheritance No class Conflict Economic planning
Competition Subsidy, Economic planning
Price mechanism Limited freedom of choice
Inequalities
Intext Questions 4.2
1. Developed Economy and Developing Economy
2. Economic development is a process by which an economy’s real national income
increases over a long period of time.
3. Natural Resources, Human Resources, Capital Formation, Technology.
4. Caste system , family type , racial
5. It does not take into account the environmental costs and resource depletion.
6. Economic growth is a short term improvement in real income whereas economic
development is long run increase in real income plus improvement in overall
standard of living and quality of life.
7. Capital formation determines the growth rate given the capital output ratio.
